# Brandeis-Endowment-Fund
The optimized portfolio for the Brandeis University Endowment Fund achieved a balanced asset allocation, aligning with the client’s return objectives and risk tolerance. 

Client Description: 
Our client is the Brandeis University Endowment fund. This fund serves Brandeis University by investing donated funds on behalf of the University. This fund is essential to Brandeis University’s Business model, as it serves as a source of spending for the university. As a smaller University, the institution’s total assets are significantly smaller than that of competing larger universities. Successful investment of the endowment fund further enables Brandeis University to be able to increase their operating budget, and to spend money to improve the operations of the university. Therefore, this fund is a very important part of the university’s functions, and must be invested carefully to optimize the returns for the university’s purposes. 
Client Objectives (Risk & Return) & Constraints : 
Generally, endowments have lower risk aversion and desire higher returns than other forms of funds. Brandeis University’s preference for risk is slightly lower than that of larger universities like Harvard University or Massachusetts Institute of Technology. Nonetheless, their risk and return preferences are fairly consistent with that of general endowments. For Brandeis University, the endowment supports approximately 15% of the University’s operating budget. 
Capital Market Expectation
Capital market expectations for equities are positive for the next 3-5 years, with predictions of expected returns ranging from 3.2%-9% for both domestic and global equities, and median volatilities ranging from 17%-26%. Outstanding sectors highlighted for the upcoming years include technology, communications, healthcare, energy, and real estate. These sectors are expected to benefit largely in upcoming years due to technological advancements and artificial intelligence. Other sectors to be considered include consumer discretionary, industrials, utilities, consumer staples, raw materials and financial services sectors. A combination of ETFs, index funds, and individual securities will best diversify investment portfolios.
Modeling Process: 
Our modeling process included selecting 200 securities, which we first analyzed based on correlations. The results of this analysis allowed us to select the least correlated securities, shrinking the portfolio to 60 securities with low correlations. With this selection, we modeled various methods of variance-covariance calculations, which aided us to gain more accurate results within our portfolio. The portfolio was first modeled using historical returns, and weights were calculated without shorting constraints. The analysis that followed used historical returns to model the portfolio with a constraint to remove shorting options. Due to the inconsistencies and shortcomings of using historical returns exclusively for modeling projections, we proceeded with the Black-Litterman model to determine the final optimal weights for this portfolio. After completing a Black-Litterman tracking matrix, we were able to adjust the returns based on our analyst opinions. This enabled us to synthesize a portfolio, using our client’s portfolio allocations, to create a diversified portfolio to meet the client’s goals and objectives. 
COMPLETE REPORT :
Client Portfolio : 
The Brandeis University Endowment Fund is the investment fund within Brandeis University that is managed by the university Investment Management team in the Office of Investment Management. Endowment funds are an entity that raises capital from donors, and allocates the funds into investment portfolios. The assets within the endowments are tax deductible. General endowment funds hold a variety of equities, bonds, cash, and securities for diversification. The ultimate beneficiary of an endowment fund is the institution which holds the fund, which in this context, is Brandeis University. 

Total Assets Under Management: 
The Brandeis University endowment fund holds a value of $1.22 Billion in assets as of June 2023. The most recent reported annual returns are +4.9%, and annualized returns are reported to be +7.5% over a 5 year period. The current asset class target range aims for 20%-60% investment in equities, 20%-50% investment in hedge funds, 0%-25% real assets, 5%-30% in fixed income securities. Additionally, the beta-adjusted equity exposure is targeted at 70%. 

Client Objectives & Constraints
The fund has set two primary objectives to guide investment of the endowment capital. The first objective is to ensure investments are adjusted for risk to maximize returns over a long term period. Risk mitigation derives from diversification of selected asset classes for investment. Diversification includes investments across different equities and asset classes; ranging from developed equities, emerging equities, private equities, hedge funds, credit, real estate, energy, and fixed incomes. The second objective is that accounting for inflation adjustment, the annual returns of the endowment portfolio should be enough to upkeep the value of future spending for the fund. The endowment fund has goals to stay within what is considered an “acceptable risk level”, and maintains a long-term asset allocation policy. Regarding the asset allocation policy, it is determined by factors such as the fund’s future needs, liquidity, expected future donations (cash flows), and endowment support to the operating budget under a variety of financial scenarios; including both positive and negative projections. Volatility, long term rate of return, and correlations between asset classes is considered within the portfolio to ensure balance in allocations. Assets are reviewed and revised quarterly as needed. The endowment supports approximately 15% of Brandeis University’s operational budget.






Client Strategy : 
The endowment fund’s strategy consists of 3 key activities to facilitate the meeting of objectives. The first activity is the production of excess returns, the second activity is to construct a portfolio that can withstand all market conditions, and the third activity is to ensure that returns are asymmetric with relation to risks. In order to achieve the objectives through this strategy, the investment office implements thorough research on markets and market opportunities. Additionally, there is a focus on development of relationships with investment partners to decrease turnover within the portfolio. Volatility is overseen by portfolio managers to ensure the highest impact on investments, whose returns will affect spending of the overall University entity. The investments are globalized, and are not only diverse in their asset allocation, but diverse in geographical locations. 

Capital Market Expectations : 
Equities-
Both U.S. Equities and Global Equities are expected to have steady growth and higher overall volatility in the next 3-5 years U.S equities are predicted to have expected returns of 3.2%-5.2%, with a median volatility of 17%. Global Equities are expected to have slightly higher returns of about 7.7%-9%, with somewhat higher volatility ranging from 18%-26%. In developed markets, growth is expected to be moderate and stable, with slight increases in the potential of increased volatility because of expected changes in economic conditions. Within emerging markets, growth potential is high, but favorability of such investments is offset by increased risks due to political and economic factors. 
Fixed Income-
Yields for Fixed Income are expected to be steady in upcoming years with low volatility rates. As global economic conditions change and improve, there is a potential for returns to increase higher than expected in the foreseeable future. Current projections for U.S. aggregate bonds have expected returns of roughly 4.5%-5.5%, with volatility of 5.7%. U.S Treasury Bonds are similar with 4.2%-5.2% returns and 5.9% median volatility. Corporate bonds in the U.S. are expected to have slightly higher returns of 5.6%-6.6%, with a higher median volatility of 10%. Global bonds are similar to bonds in the U.S. with returns of 4.4%-5.4% and a median volatility of 4.4%. Both JP Morgan and Vanguard analysts suggest that now is a good time to invest in both Corporate and Government bonds as circumstances that support bond growth improves, which increases stability and return while decreasing risk. 
Mortgage Backed Securities-
Mortgage backed securities are expected to continue to have relatively high yields for the next 3-5 years. Analysts suggest that investing in mortgage backed securities right now can help to reduce investment risk within a portfolio in future years. Expected yields for MBS in the upcoming years is around 5%, and liquidation of the asset is easily accessible for investors. Prices of mortgage backed securities are currently lower than expected, which increases potential for higher future returns. The general credit risk associated with mortgage backed securities is also lower than that of other securities. Charles Schwab analysts suggest that investors consider purchasing mortgage backed securities assets while the current prices are below expectations, in order to benefit from the favorable returns that are projected into the next few years. These securities serve to further diversify a portfolio, which also helps to decrease idiosyncratic risk within the endowment fund. 

Asset Allocation-
Within the endowment’s framework exists a policy allocation across four asset types: Equities, fixed incomes, hedge funds, and real assets. In regards to our capital market expectations research, we are recommending that our client invest in Equities, Fixed Income, and Mortgage Backed Securities. Returns for hedge funds within the next few years are expected to have higher volatility and lower returns. Recent activity in the sector has been slow, as investor doubts towards hedge fund activity continues to grow. As a result of negative outlook and projections, our consultancy has removed hedge funds from the endowment’s asset allocation. Our consultancy also has removed real assets as a result of the need for hands-on management to maintain the asset class within the client’s endowment portfolio. To meet capital market expectations and serve the needs of the client, our asset allocation is as follows: Equities (60%), Fixed Income (30%), Mortgage backed securities (10%). 
Equities-
Within equities, the sectors with highest potential for returns and lower risk are: technology, communications, healthcare, energy, and real estate. Artificial Intelligence developments have contributed to growing enthusiasm for these sectors, and increased efficiencies are expected to boost growth in the next 3-5 years. The healthcare sector is also experiencing new growth as a result of emerging drug discoveries and production. In the real estate sector, real estate assets serve as a hedge against inflation and typically have lower correlations with traditional assets. Analysts currently believe real estate and infrastructure assets are undervalued in the market, and there is opportunity for large returns if securities are purchased at the right price. The following sectors are also worth investing in based on growth potential, but have slightly more risk: consumer discretionary, industrials, utilities, and consumer staples. The following sectors carry higher risk than other sectors, but still maintain growth potential: raw materials and financial services (i.e. banks). It is worth noting that many, if not all of these sectors are dependent on economic performance, and those that are strong have the highest returns and lowest risk when the economy is doing well. 
Fixed Income -
Within fixed income, both corporate and government bonds are favorable for returns in upcoming years. Bonds within the U.S. are the safest amongst fixed income securities. There is potential for value in global bonds, but emerging market bonds hold high volatility and may dilute the potential for returns within the portfolio. 


Securities Selection -
To improve diversification within the model, a combination of ETFs, index funds, and individual securities have been selected. Individual securities carry a higher risk than ETFs and indices, so combining the three within the model will improve portfolio diversification and decrease idiosyncratic risk. To conduct our portfolio analysis, our consultancy began by selecting equities in the technology, communications, healthcare, energy, real estate, consumer discretionary, industrials, utilities, consumer staples, raw materials and financial services sectors. Based on our research of sector expectations, we weighted our selection to include more securities from the sectors with higher future growth potential. We selected the highest performing Fixed Income and Mortgage Backed Securities to include in our client’s portfolio. Given that our client has above average risk tolerance and preferences for returns, we selected securities based on growth potential and positive industry projections in upcoming years. 

Portfolio Analysis -
After selecting securities, we downloaded 5 years of monthly stock adjusted prices of our 200 securities, and calculated the monthly returns, average returns, and monthly excess returns for each security. 
Correlations
To determine the viability of our securities within the client’s endowment portfolio, our consultancy conducted a correlation analysis. Highly correlated securities do not serve to diversify a portfolio, since correlated securities behave similarly in regards to returns. To ensure diversification and reduce risk, we identified all securities with correlations greater than 0.6, and manually selected securities to remove those with high correlations. Through this process, we identified 60 viable securities to hold within the portfolio. 
Evaluating Selected Securities
To begin our analysis with our 60 selected securities, we organized the 5 years of monthly stock adjusted prices, recalculated the monthly returns, average returns, and monthly excess returns for each security. 
Variance-Covariance
In determining the diversification of the portfolio, we conducted four different types of variance-covariance analyses. The first analysis was a straightforward sample variance covariance matrix, which yielded low variance-covariance for our securities. We followed this analysis with a Single Index Model variance-covariance. To complete this analysis, we selected the S&P 500 (^GSPC) market index to serve as a benchmark for our calculations. Next, using the average correlation of our 60 securities as a correlation coefficient, we conducted a constant correlation analysis. Our last analysis was a shrinkage variance covariance. To determine the shrinkage variance covariance, we calculated the benchmark proportion of each security, which we found by determining each security’s average, standard deviation, variance, and market capitalization. The benchmark value of each security is the security’s market capitalization divided by the sum of all security market capitalizations. 
Forming the Portfolio-
Unconstrained Optimization -
The first portfolio allocation we conducted was an unconstrained optimization that allowed for stock shorting. Using a monthly risk free rate of 0.02%, and the formerly calculated benchmark proportions of our securities, we calculated the optimal portfolio weights for each of the 60 stocks within the portfolio, ensuring that the summation of the weights was equal to 100%. The result of the unconstrained optimization was that some securities had much heavier weights than others, some being as high as 155%, and some as low as -40%.
Constrained Optimization -
Assuming that stock shorts are not preferred for the client’s endowment portfolio, we then conducted a constrained optimization to exclude negative weights from the portfolio allocation. We set a “Normalizing Factor” using the equation for the Sharpe Ratio: (Expected Average Benchmark Return - Risk Free Rate)/Portfolio Standard Deviation. Using Excel Solver, we set the objective to maximize the Normalizing Factor by changing the portfolio weights, with the constraint that the sum of the portfolios equals 1, and that none of the portfolio weights were negative. We achieved a more normally distributed weight allocation amongst our securities using this method. However, using historical/benchmark returns to determine portfolio allocations is inherently flawed, in that it is not an accurate predictor of returns nor risk. To mitigate the inaccuracy of this type of model, we proceeded next with the Black Litterman model to select portfolio weights. 
Black-Litterman Model -
We began the process of forming the Black-Litterman model by generating a Black-Litterman asset allocation. To adjust the model for analyst opinions, we first had to form the Black-Litterman tracking matrix, then assess the results of the benchmark returns we calculated earlier. We determined that we believed based on external market data that Intel Corp and HP Corp, both technology sector firms, would perform slightly better than the benchmark proportion suggested. Our assumption was that Intel Corp would perform 0.11% higher, and HP Corp would perform 0.15% better. Using these assumptions and the Black-Litterman tracking matrix, we were able to calculate the monthly returns of each of the 60 securities, adjusted for our two opinions. Using these results, we recalculated the opinion adjusted optimized portfolio weights for each of our securities. To constrain our weights to meet our target asset allocations: Equities (60%), Fixed Income (35%), Mortgage backed securities (10%), and to ensure that stock-shorting was not a part of our asset allocation, we used solver to address and find the optimal portfolio weights. Again, we set the objective to maximize the Normalizing Factor by changing the portfolio weights, with the constraint that the sum of the portfolios equals 1, and that none of the portfolio weights were negative. After completing these calculations, we were able to achieve our client’s desired portfolio. The results of our model show the optimal portfolio for the Brandeis University Endowment Fund, which includes favorable expected returns, and the specific allocations that belong within each of the 60 final securities contained within the portfolio. 

Sources : 
2024 equity sector performance outlook. institutional.fidelity.com. (n.d.). https://institutional.fidelity.com/advisors/insights/spotlights/2024-equity-sector-performance-outlook 
2024-2029 housing market predictions | U.S. News Housing Market Index | U.S. news. U.S. News. (n.d.). https://realestate.usnews.com/real-estate/housing-market-index/articles/housing-market-predictions-for-the-next-5-years 
Brandeis University Endowment Fund. Strategy | Office of Investment Management | Brandeis University. (n.d.). https://www.brandeis.edu/investment-management/strategy.html 
Deloitte. (2024, October 22). 2025 Investment Management Outlook. Deloitte Insights. https://www2.deloitte.com/us/en/insights/industry/financial-services/financial-services-industry-outlooks/investment-management-industry-outlook.html 
Deloitte. (2024, September 27). 2025 Commercial Real Estate Outlook. Deloitte Insights. https://www2.deloitte.com/us/en/insights/industry/financial-services/commercial-real-estate-outlook.html 
Endowment funds. Corporate Finance Institute. (2023, May 15). https://corporatefinanceinstitute.com/resources/wealth-management/endowment-fund/ 
Graddy, K., & Warren, N. (n.d.). Investing for Future Generations: Major Trends in Endowments. Brandeis University - Brandeis International Business School. other, Waltham, MA. 
Adam Kuerbitz Vice President, A. (n.d.). Why now could be the time to transition from cash to bonds. J.P. Morgan Private Bank U.S. https://privatebank.jpmorgan.com/nam/en/insights/markets-and-investing/ideas-and-insights/why-there-is-still-time-to-move-from-cash-into-bonds#:~:text=Looking%20at%20the%20forward%20curve%20of%20expected,September%202026%20as%20the%20Fed%20cuts%20rates.&text=In%20contrast%2C%20the%20yield%20on%20the%20AAA,at%204.07%25%20TEY%20throughout%20all%20time%20frames. 
Martin, C. (n.d.). Why to consider mortgage-backed securities now. Schwab Brokerage. https://www.schwab.com/learn/story/why-to-consider-mortgage-backed-securities-now 
Shuleva, B. (2023, December 12). Consumer Staples Sector Outlook 2024: Consumer Staples Stocks. Fidelity. https://www.fidelity.com/learning-center/trading-investing/outlook-consumer-staples 
Treitel, J. (n.d.). Global listed real estate: Where are we in the listed real estate cycle? | CBRE Investment Management. CBRE Investment Management. https://www.cbreim.com/insights/articles/where-are-we-in-the-listed-real-estate-cycle 
Vanguard. (n.d.-a). ETFs vs. Mutual Funds: Which to choose. https://investor.vanguard.com/investor-resources-education/etfs/etf-vs-mutual-fund 
Vanguard. (n.d.-b). Market perspectives. Our investment and economic outlook, October 2024. https://advisors.vanguard.com/insights/article/series/market-perspectives 
Vanguard. (n.d.-c). Our investment and economic outlook, August 2024. https://corporate.vanguard.com/content/corporatesite/us/en/corp/articles/investment-economic-outlook-aug-2024.html#:~:text=Bond%20yields%20at%20midyear%202021,%C2%AE%20(VCMM)%20projections%20show. 
